---
layout: posts
title: Weekly Math Puzzle - Week 24/2024
usemathjax: true
published: false
---

Putnam's problems were tought so we decided to go back to the basics this week.
Here are a couple of problems from *Problem-solving strategies* by Arthur Engel.
We think it might be a good idea to stick to a textbook for a while.

## Problem 1 (Ch. 1, Problem 31)

Let $$a_1, a_2, \ldots, a_n$$ be a permutation of the numbers $$1, 2, \ldots, n$$.
If $$n$$ is odd, then the product $$P=(a_1-1)(a_2-2)\ldots(a_n-n)$$ is even.
Prove this.

*My approach*.
Assume that the product $$P$$ is odd.
Then, all the factors must be odd, meaning that $$a_i-i$$ must be odd for all $$i=1,2,\ldots,n$$.
This is the same as saying that the parity of $$a_i$$ is different from the parity of $$i$$, e.g. when $$i$$ is odd, $$a_i$$ must be even and vice versa.
However, since $$n$$ is odd, we have more odd numbers than even numbers in the set $$\{1,2,\ldots,n\}$$.
So it is not possible to match all the odd $$a_i$$ with the even $$i$$.
Hence, the product $$P$$ must be even.

## Problem 2 (Ch. 1, Problem 8)

There is a positive integer in each square of a rectangular table.
In each move, you may double each number in a row or subtract 1 from each number of a column.
Prove that you can reach a table of zeros by a sequence of these permitted moves.

*My approach*. 
Notice that if you can solve the case of a $$n\times 1$$ table, you can solve the case of a $$n\times m$$ table by solving the $$m$$ columns one by one.

So, let's focus on the case of a $$n\times 1$$ table.
Let's denote the numbers in the table as $$a_1, a_2, \ldots, a_n$$.
Without the loss of generality, we can assume that $$a_1 \leq a_2 \leq \ldots \leq a_n$$.
By subtracting 1 from this table $$a_1-1$$ times, we get $$a_1=1$$ and $$a_i = a_i - a_1 + 1$$ for all $$i=2,3,\ldots,n$$.
If there exists an index $$j$$ such that $$a_j > 1$$ and $$a_{i<j}=1$$, we can double the rows $$i=1,2,\ldots,j-1$$ as long as the value of $$a_i$$ does not exceed $$a_j$$. 
Then, we can repeatedly substract 1 until the smallest number in the table becomes 1 again.
By repeating this process, we can reach a table of ones.
And by substracting 1 from the table of ones, we can reach a table of zeros.