---
layout: posts
title: The upper confidence bound algorithm
usemathjax: true
published: true
---

<!-- ## A primer on bandits -->
Bandits are a class of reinforcement learning (RL) problems where a learner has to choose between different actions, each of which has an unknown reward.
The key difference between bandits and RL problems is that in bandits, there is an absence of states or transition between states.
Through interaction with the environment, the learner learns the reward distribution of each action and tries to maximize its cumulative reward.

In this blog post, we will discuss the upper confidence bound (UCB) algorithm, which is a popular algorithm for solving bandit problems.

## A primer on stochastic bandits (Lattimore and Szepesvári, 2020)

A stochastic bandit is a collection of distributions $$\nu = \{P_a : a\in \mathcal{A} \}$$ in which:

- The learner interacts with the environment for $n$ rounds. We call $n$ the time horizon.
- At each round $t$, the learner selects an action $$A_t \in \mathcal{A}$$ and receives a reward $$X_t \sim P_{A_t}$$.
In this blog post, we assume that $$X_t$$ is a $$1$$-sub-Gaussian random variable with mean $$\mu_a := \mathbb{E}[X | A = a]$$ and variance of at most $$1$$.
- The sequence of outcomes is denoted by $$A_1, X_1, A_2, X_2, \ldots, A_n, X_n$$.

In additional, it has to satisfy two statistical assumptions:

1. The conditional distribution $X_t$ given $A_1, X_1, \ldots, A_{t-1}, X_{t-1}, A_t$ is $$P_{A_t}$$, capturing the fact that the environment samples rewards from the distribution corresponding to the action selected by the learner.
2. The conditional law of action $A_t$ given $A_1, X_1, \ldots, A_{t-1}, X_{t-1}$ is $$\pi_t(\cdot \mid A_1, X_1, \ldots, A_{t-1}, X_{t-1})$$, where $\pi_t$ is a probability distribution over the action space $\mathcal{A}$.
The learner is thus characterized by the sequence of probability distributions $\pi_1, \pi_2, \ldots, \pi_n$.
Importantly, the assumption here is that the learner cannot use the future to make decisions.

The usual metric to evaluate the performance of the learner is the _expected regret_, which is defined as the difference between the cumulative reward of the optimal policy and the cumulative reward of the learner:

$$
\begin{align}
R_n := n \mu^* - \mathbb{E}\left[\sum_{t=1}^n X_t\right]
\end{align}
$$

where $$\mu^* := \max_{a\in \mathcal{A}} \mu_a$$ is the mean of the optimal action.

From the above formulation, the optimal policy is indeed the one that selects the action with the highest expected reward at each round.
The goal of the learner is to _minimize the expected regret_ by devising a good policy.
It is worth emphasizing that this is not an optimization problem; the learner does not know the reward distributions $$\nu$$ and has to learn them through interaction with the environment.

## The UCB algorithm

The crux of this algorithm relies on the _optimism principle_, which states that the learner should be optimistic about the reward of each action.
Why is this a good idea?
We shall see that this philosophy leads to a good balance between exploration and exploitation.

In particular, the UCB algorithm maintains an upper confidence bound for each action, denoted by $$\text{UCB}_a(t-1)$$.
At each round, the learner selects the action with the highest UCB and receives the corresponding reward.
Concretely, we have the following steps for every round $$t=1,2,\ldots,n$$:

1. Select action $$A_t = \underset{a\in \mathcal{A}}{\text{argmax}}~\text{UCB}_a(t-1)$$.
2. Observe reward $$X_t \sim P_{A_t}$$.

What should we choose as the UCB?
By the optimism principle, $$\text{UCB}_a(t-1)$$ should be an overestimate of $$\mu_a := \mathbb{E}[X | A = a]$$ and should converge to it as the number of rounds increases.
Specifically, we define the UCB as follows:

$$
\begin{align}
\text{UCB}_a(t-1, \delta) = \hat{\mu}_a(t-1) + \color{darkred}{\underbrace{\sqrt{\frac{2\log(1/\delta)}{T_a(t-1)}}}_{\text{Exploration bonus}}} \tag{1} \label{eq:ucb}
\end{align}
$$

where $$T_a(t-1)$$ is the number of times action $$a$$ has been selected up to round $$t-1$$ and $$\delta$$ is a confidence parameter.
The term $$\hat{\mu}_a(t-1)$$ is the empirical mean of the rewards of action $$a$$ up to round $$t-1$$:

$$
\begin{align}
\hat{\mu}_a(t-1) := \frac{1}{T_a(t-1)}\sum_{s=1}^{t-1} \mathbb{I}(A_s = a)X_s,
\end{align}
$$

One small remark is that this choice of UCB is not unique; there are other ways to define the UCB.
In essence, this form of UCB in Eq. $$\ref{eq:ucb}$$ is almost an inverse of the [Hoeffding inequality](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hoeffding%27s_inequality) with one caveat that the count $$T_a(t-1)$$ in the denominator is a random variable as well.
We can think of the term $$\sqrt{\frac{2\log(1/\delta)}{T_a(t-1)}}$$ as an _exploration bonus_ that encourages the learner to explore actions that have not been selected frequently (notice the inverse relationship between $$T_a(t-1)$$ and the exploration bonus).
And at the same time, choosing $$\delta$$ is a delicate problem; a small value of $$\delta$$ leads to a more aggressive exploration, while a large value of $$\delta$$ leads to premature abandonment of the optimal action.

## Theoretical guarantees of UCB

The UCB algorithm has been shown to have a sublinear regret bound:

<p style="background-color: lightblue; padding: 10px;">
    <strong>Theorem (Lattimore and Szepesvári, 2020).</strong> If $\delta=1/n^2$, then the regret of the UCB algorithm is bounded by
    \[
        R_n = \mathcal{O}(\sqrt{nk\log n})
    \]
</p>

As an intermediate step, we first prove a weaker result:

**Lemma.** If $\delta=1/n^2$, then the regret of the UCB algorithm is bounded by

$$
\begin{align}
R_n \leq 3\sum_{i=1}^k \Delta_i + \sum_{i: \Delta_i \geq 0} \frac{16\log(n)}{\Delta_i}
\end{align}
$$

where $$\Delta_i := \mu^* - \mu_i$$ is the gap between the optimal action and action $$i$$.
